# Exit Ticket: My Experiences with Digital History

As I finish this course, I find myself defaulting to the written word to reflect back on my experiences. Despite the fact that I’ve learned a large variety of new storytelling methods this class, the written word is still almost certainly the medium I communicate best with. When I began this course in early May, I had never tried digital history before. In fact, my experience with history was limited to a couple of electives earlier in my degree. Nevertheless, I was very excited to stretch some new muscles and learn how to use tools I hadn’t even thought could exist before looking through the syllabus. I was also very excited to have a new topic I could discuss with my partner (who is a software developer). He was particularly excited I was taking this class, and really helped me find my feet in the first few weeks. 

Overall, I was consistently and constantly surprised by this class. The first surprise emerged right at the beginning, when I rather suddenly and drastically had to change my mindset around failure in order to be successful in this class (that’s at least a bit ironic, isn’t it?). I’m terrified of failure, and the fact that I would not only be failing often, but was expected to fail as a part of my learning process, was a shock to me. Eventually, I welcomed it – even when it frustrated me to no end – because I was able to recognize how it helped me learn. Another major (and quite surprising) takeaway for me was just how much hidden work goes into creating digital history projects. When I admired archival projects in the past (and in the early weeks of this class, to be honest), I didn’t quite realize the sheer amount of effort it took to just format the data into a manner that could be read by a specific piece of software before those working on the project could even begin their analysis. Data are messy, which I hadn’t quite realized, and I suppose I thought it was just magically formatted with the click of a button or a few lines of code… well, I definitely know differently now!

The amount of analysis that I did in this class, and the sheer number of tools I used, was definitely something I enjoyed. Especially because it provided me with a tangible means of tracking my learning. When playing with a new tool, I often had an initial “that’s neat… but now what?” moment. This only disappeared once I’d truly spent time with the tool. For example, the first time I saw Voyant in action, all I saw was a mess of words. It was only after I’d used it multiple times that I understood its analytical power, and ultimately, I ended up using it as a key analytical tool in my final project. Through this exploration of tools, I also feel like I successfully managed to discern when a program would be helpful for my analysis, and when another one might be more suited. For example, in my final project, I realized that OpenRefine wouldn’t work to clean my text- based data because it had been designed to be used on data that was already somewhat organized (and in a format like excel, csv, json, etc). Anoter example is that I specifically chose to use Voyant over AntConc for my work with the Boys Will Be Boys newsletters because I wanted to see which themes were most popular within the documents, not simply guess at which themes I thought might be most popular (via keyword searches). Through using Voyant, the focus on community became an essential theme within that project that may not have emerged otherwise.

The tools we used also changed how I saw history, and what I thought was possible to know about the past. For example, textual analysis may be considered an “entry point” to digital history, but the ability to rapidly search though an entire historical document, or even several texts, changes the kinds of questions we can ask and how we ask them. These tools also changed my conceptual understanding of history, which – prior to this class – felt very much like this grand, formal, distant thing. By being able to take history apart (almost literally) and analyze it with software, it stopped feeling so far away and became more tangible. I was able reframe history as “thinking critically about and exploring the past”; as such, it became much easier to ask questions that moved beyond “what happened?”, instead asking why something might have occurred, and how the perspectives of myself and others have influenced these narratives. Overall, “history” became more malleable within my hands, and that was largely due to the tools allowing me to think about it differently.

Something I particularly appreciated was the ability to collaborate with my peers. Despite the fact that I did a lot of independent research (perhaps more than usual, given the fact that this was an online course), digital history truly is a team sport. There were moments where I was helped by my peers, and moments where I was able to help them in return. This was super rewarding! I loved being able to read my classmates comments in Hypothesis (even when I didn’t have anything to add to the conversation), and I really appreciated the was we created a community over Discord where we were all able to share knowledge and collaboratively build upon each others’ work. 

Beyond wrestling with the technology, I did have some other struggles. My biggest challenge was probably documentation. Tracking everything I was doing (especially my mistakes and errors!) with screenshots was a really daunting task for me. I rapidly realized its importance, however, as I went to create my weekly journals. There were several occasions where I actually had to recreate an error because I wanted to discuss it and I’d forgotten to take a screenshot! Trying to find a balance between the honesty of my actual process (aka forgetting documentation) and providing Dr. Graham with an accurate portrait of my learning was difficult to balance, but I hope it came through in my weekly work. I also think that I could have done a slightly better job developing a professionalized online presence. I’m still a little shy about sharing my work online (outside of a classroom space), largely due to that fear of failure I mentioned earlier. One big step for me was to allow my partner to follow my git profile and learn about my progress through the same material that I was presenting to Dr. Graham. Hopefully I will be able to continue to take smaller steps towards sharing my own digital history work, because I do want to continue with it!

I do have some idea of how I’d like to continue my digital history learning. First, I would like to begin learning how to use Github from the command line (I noticed that one of my peers did her entire week six project from the command line, which was super impressive to me!). I would also really love to do more sonification projects, using some of the tools I’ve learned in class. When I’m feeling more confident in this, I think I’m going to follow [Dr. Graham’s tutorial on the Programming Historian](https://programminghistorian.org/en/lessons/sonification)! Additionally, I’m hoping to do some more work with Leaflet, because it was one of the programs I had a lot of fun with, and I enjoy engaging with history geographically. One specific project that I think I would find rewarding is an oral history map where a viewer could explore the map of a particular city by clicking on marked locations that would highlight an audio recording of someone telling a story about that location (or an experience they had there). While I have no idea what the trials and tribulations of this might be, I think it would be a lot of fun to figure out. On to the next adventure!
